There has been much debate surrounding interacting galaxies and the change in star formation rate (SFR) in each galaxy that may be caused by gravitational forces. In much of the literature, there has been discussion of a star formation enhancement (SFE) between a factor of 2 to 10 times (here, SFE means interacting SFR / mass-matched quiescent SFR) across the galactic disk, tidal features and core. This primarily comes from simulation works.  However, recent works have began to find (particularly from observations, but also better simulations) that any SFE is significantly lower than this – ranging from 1 to 5 - and only in the galactic cores. An enhancement of > 2 is only achieved in very specific circumstances (with interactors having similar masses, and the interaction being a wet one; I.e. lots of gas is involved). This has led some recent literature to question the existence of any SFE at all.

My idea for WEAVE would be to use the new IFUs to observe a selection of the interacting galaxies that were constrained by citizen scientists in Galaxy Zoo: Mergers and (hopefully) by automated methods in my upcoming paper (my PhD one, not the ESAC one). The IFUs would be, like Tobias’ project, looking for peaks in Hydrogen Alpha and O[III] for signs of intense star formation. It is important to note that only one system in GZ: Mergers has been looked at in MaNGA, so this would be new for these systems.

We would focus on interactions which have had only recently passed their closest point (such as the example images above of Arp 240 and Arp 256, attached). At this point, simulations show that any starburst should be at its peak. I would then want to observe some mass-matched field galaxies for comparison. A secondary goal would be to look at interactors which were long passed their closest approach (such as Arp N and NGC N, attached) to see if any starburst has faded. The result of this would be WEAVE weighing in on the ongoing discussion between simulations and observations about SFRs in interacting galaxies.
